Okay, the tape is on. Would you give us some biographical data on how you grew
up and how you got interested in writing science fiction. Well, I grew up in
Kansas. Both of my parents teach. At least my mother used to and then she became
a newspaper woman. So we, I grew up with words around the house, a lot. Oh, I
was making up stories from, well, I guess I was four or five, the kind of thing
where mother reads you the bedtime story and puts you to bed and nobody feels
like going to sleep yet. So since I was too young to read, I hadn't discovered
reading on the covers with flashlights yet, I made up stories until I was ready
to go to sleep. And then I started writing them down when I learned to write.
And about junior high school, I discovered science fiction. Up to then, it was
cowboys and horses, with a lot of girls, I think. I discovered science fiction
in junior high, and I don't know why it caught me the way it did. I kind of got
away from it later and got strictly into mystery, and then came back to science
fiction when I was in college. and I've been hooked on science fiction mysteries
ever since. You probably noticed that a lot of the combination of the two in my
work.
Being a little Kansas girl did you ever read the Oz books? No, as a matter of
fact I think aside from The Wizard of Oz I think I'd only seen I knew there were
a number of others because I had some friends that had others but I'd never read
them and I still haven't read them.
The dedications to all five of the books that you have in print now are all to
Pat. He must have influenced you a great deal. Could you give some background
into that influence and how he helped you get where you are? When we got
married, I was writing. We got married back in 66, and I think that Star Trek
was either on the air, I think it was on the air at the time, and like a lot of
people I got really hooked on Star Trek and was writing episodes for it, and I
guess at that time we were just going together. At any rate, when we got
married, I had stopped writing Star Trek and writing some stuff of my own and he
got ignored somewhat because I was busy writing and he said as long as you are
going to be doing that, why don't you try sending it out? He bugged me, bugged
me until I finally started sending things out and once I got sent sending stuff
out, of course I had lots of rejections. he was very good about letting me cry
on his shoulder and also very candid about his opinion in on the various
stories, some which led to grand battles, but he usually turned out to be right.
So he was very influential in getting me writing and in getting me sending out
and keeping me sending out. And then once the story started selling, and once I
turned to novels, he was my critic and chief cheerleader. and I understand there
are a lot of spouses that writers don't like to consult with their spouses very
much because they're either too critical or they're not critical enough. But Pat
is very objective and he's an excellent critic and he knows, he has a good feel
for what is right and what's wrong with a story. And he has to hear everything I
read chapter by chapter and all the revisions so he's very patient and long
-suffering and he puts up with being ignored evening after evening so that I can
write because I've got deadlines I have to meet. He understands that. He makes
sure I don't kill myself. Well, he comes in and pulls the plug on the typewriter
at 2 or 3 in the morning if I'm starting to pull an all-nighter to make sure I
get to sleep because I do have a job to get to the next morning. So he's very
important. He's, as I say, a chief critic and cheerleader. he's now also my
business manager he handles the publicity he talks to the TV stations to get the
interviews on TV to get autograph sessions set up he handles plane tickets and
hotel reservations and all the business ends he's an attorney so he's an expert
on copyright and he's starting to get seminars on copyright as a matter of fact
and he handles all the taxes and all the business work So, it's kind of a
partnership. I do the writing and get the publishing done. And he does all the
work that keeps it going.
According to the bios in the backs of some of the books, it also says that Pat
introduced you to science fiction fandom and to science fiction conventions. Do
you find these a great help to your writing? I've met a lot of writers at the
science fiction conventions. I've just been doing short stories. and it was
meeting the writers that got me started writing the novels because they were the
ones who were saying, that's the only place you're going to make any money or
make any kind of name for yourself. But short stories, you can't make any money
in short stories. And, of course, some of the writers have become some of my
dearest friends now. I really like talking about writing. So I love meeting fans
who want to do nothing more than sit up all night and talk about science fiction
and writing. and I really think that it helps because you meet people, and then
you're a face to them, not just a name, and they'll read something that is
written by someone they know, and then they can recommend it to friends, and I
realize that only a very small percentage of the population is in fandom and
attends a convention. If all the fans in the United States bought a book, it
would be a failure. You have to have a lot more than that. But still, I think it
helps. And you get used to talking to people and get used to going on TV shows.
Pretty soon, I'm going to make some trips to the East Coast this year, and I
hope soon to make some trips to the West Coast, which means I'll get autograph
sessions at bookstores out there, which will get my name spread a little wider.
So aside from being a lot of fun, I think that as far as a writing career goes,
that going to the convention is very, it pays.
You also work full-time, as I understand it. Would you describe what your real
-world job is and also how you schedule your writing and your job so you can get
both done? well the job is a regular 9 to 5 job as it happens I'm chief
technologist in the department of radiology at the college of veterinary
medicine I'm an x-ray technician for animals in what it amounts to I'm in charge
of educating the vet students that is I'm in charge of them when they're in the
department itself which is sort of a laboratory situation for them and I think
It's a 9-to-5 job, and then I come home and write in the evening. I usually end
up taking a notebook with notes on whatever the current work is to work with me,
and there's a hiatus now and then. And when that happens, I can sit down and jot
notes. I can't actually get any writing done. I've got too much to do, and there
isn't enough of a long span of no work to get anything done. but a lot of times
in the midst of purely physical activity or purely routine activity at work,
something I've been having a problem with, for instance, or an idea for a
revision or an idea of something to do in the chapter ahead will come up, and I
can jot it down. I'm still working while I'm in the real world job because my
subconscious is still grinding away of whatever the writing project is at home,
And then I come home when I write in the evening and I'll write through on
weekends, too. How do your colleagues and students at work take to your writing?
What do they think about it? They're very tickled about it. I didn't know how
administration and some of the doctors, the clinicians, would take to it because
science fiction in many quarters thought of as a very lowbrow kind of writing.
writing, but I find that they're very pleased about it when the dean of the vet
school brings people to our hospital on a tour. He usually makes mention of the
fact that I'm a public science fiction writer, and I've gotten a couple of
attaboy kind of letters from the president of the university. And we have, of
course, journalism students at the university, and I'm usually good for for
about one appearance in the paper per semester, as one of the journalism
students has to get his so many inches of copy in, and almost always one of them
will appear. I'm pretty well publicized around campus, and I don't find them
looking down on me because I'm being published in fiction and science fiction
instead of in scientific journals, like most of them get published. So they take
it very well and my boss is a real king. I usually turn in my convention
schedule to him at the beginning of summer. He fits his vacations in between my
convention schedule. And he lets me off almost any weekend I want during the
year to go to conventions too.
Our first exposure to you as a novelist was A Voice out of Rama. And that book
seemed to set the tone for some of your subsequent works with the various
elements in it. As you mentioned previously, it's got a bit of a mystery,
although not quite as much as some of the other novels. How did you come to
write this book? How long did the idea sit there percolating before it came out?
I don't really know. I try to keep track of the process of creativity because it
fascinates me. Also, because as a writer I'm asked so many questions about where
ideas come from and how they develop that I keep trying to find out. I had a
couple of writers who ganged up on me at some conventions convincing me that I
really needed to write a novel.
And I don't know, just these little bits and pieces just all came together. I
keep telling people that creativity is a little bit like recombinant DNA. all
the little everything you read and see and hear breaks up into component parts
and proves around your subconscious until it reaches a critical mass that is
also viable and then it rises to the surface and you start putting ideas around
it because the idea that comes up is just the grain in the middle you have to
add all the rest of it around but I had tried to do some Sherlock Holmes
pastitions. And one of them was a reverse, where all the Holmes, Watson
characters were females. And I had half invented a planet that had a matriarchy.
So that got me started thinking about how a matriarchy would work, and why it
would develop. And so I found myself working back for causes like that, And all
of a sudden I had the society that I used then in Voice Out of Rama. And once I
had the society, I just kind of sat down and thought, well, what kind of plot
elements, what kind of conflicts can arise out of this society that would
probably not arise out of any other? And who is the one that's going to be most
affected by these? And so I came up with the plot that way, and I came up with
my major character that way. After that, it was fun just building the planet and
trying to make it as realistic and as logical as I could.
Then the doppelganger gamut came along, and it seemed to be quite a change of
pace since it was basically a police procedure science fiction novel. You seem
to be very familiar with police procedure, with how partners have the
interaction, that sort of thing? Is this something from your background or did
you have to research this? I haven't had any practical experience in it. I did
have a police officer come up to me at a science fiction convention once when
I'd been reading a chapter of Doppelganger. And he asked me when I worked in law
enforcement. But I've been interested in law enforcement for a long time. I
noticed that the mysteries I always liked to read were the ones in which the
police were the good guys. I was never particularly interested in the lone wolf
private eye. I got listened to Dragnet on the radio and saw it on TV when I was
pretty small, and I think maybe that's my first brush with police work, and I
was just very interested in it. Joseph Wambau is one of my favorite authors, and
I happened to know somebody, by the way, who gave him a copy of Doppelganger
Gambit, and he told his friend that he really liked it a lot, which tickled me.
Once I decided I wanted to write a mystery science fiction, I went ahead and did
more research, and I've kept into it, and of course that book itself and others
have brought me into contact with more police officers, and they've passed on a
lot of material to me. And so, short of actually working in it myself, I have
gotten very familiar with it. I suppose I keep reading about it, or writing
about it, because it was interesting and because I've done so much research on
it that it's a shame not to use the material. The key to that book for me was
the characters, Jana Brill and Mama Maxwell. Were they based on people you'd
known before, or what?
No, they were based on nobody I know, except that I always pictured Mama Maxwell
as looking like Luke Ossett Jr., which I was very surprised, then, to get the
cover proof and find that the cover artist, Michael Herring, had also pictured
him the same way and found a model that looked so much like the character that
I'd pictured. It was wonderful.
Somewhere in the beginning when I was putting the book together, which had
started as a novelette, and I knew it couldn't be a novelette because here I was
15 pages into something and just barely starting it, I had decided I wanted to
use a Lady Cop. So for contrast, I gave her a male partner and I can't remember
why I decided to make him black it was one of these things that just kind of
happened somebody later pointed out that I had my female character was the one
that was working by the book and procedure and my male character was the one who
was working on intuition which is an interesting reverse on the way people
generally think of males and females and that just sort of happened the
characters sort of balanced one another but a lot of the balance was unconscious
on my part they were fun characters and I intend to work with them again. So we
will see them again. Oh, yes. As soon as I can think of something more for them
to get into. One of the other things that I really noticed in the book that made
it that much more realistic was the slang. I'm particularly curious where the
term Leos came from, a reference to the police officers. I would think I was
seeing something about law enforcement officers one time and I noticed that it
made Leo, And I thought, that's great, because it gave rise in my mind to all
kinds of connotations, and I could see police officers enjoying being called
Leos because of the lion, the fierce kind of association you get with it, and
therefore calling police stations lion den. And someone who's likely to be
picked up by the police is lion meat. I had a pejorative I had the street people
calling them pussies when they weren't happy with them but my editor wouldn't
let me keep the word in the book so I think it got changed to kitty a couple of
times in the book and I illuminated it where possible because I really didn't
like watered down I really did want to use pussy because it seemed to me like
the normal way people would pick up and twist something when they wanted to make
a derogatory term out of it I enjoy the slang. I enjoy trying to figure out
where slang comes from and where it's going to go. And you may have noticed in a
number of the books that I've played on slang, there's quite a bit of it in
Deadly Silence. And I'm even having some alien slang in the current work I'm
doing. Deadly Silence seemed, I took, to be in the same future history as the
doppelganger gambit. They all are, as a matter of fact, except monitor. That was
in a different one. And there you went a little bit into the etymology of the
word cop. I didn't realize that's where it came from until I read it in that
book. There are several possibilities.
They usually teach a little bit of that in police history. When they're teaching
in police academies, One thought it meant constable on patrol, and sometimes it
said, well, it comes from the copper buttons that they used to wear. And the
exact origin of the word isn't known. But it's interesting to me to stumble
across the term conservator of peace way back in early England. And it seems to
me that an alien who was reading Earth's history and having come across the word
cop, referring to police officers, and the earlier conservative of peace,
conservator of peace, might connect the two.
I found it interesting that the duties of the cops, you did call them cops from
then on, from chapter 2 or whatever, for the rest of the book, because of the
connotations of Leos. I found it interesting that their first priority was to
the victim, and then, lo and behold, later on, they have to defend the
perpetrator. Where did you come up with these seemingly novel ideas? They kind
of grew out of the society of the Aragara because the primary objective of the
police there was, of course, to restore peace, to be peace officers.
and of course when anything happened that was distressful to the Aragara it was
painful to everybody around them. So the first duty then was to the victim to
help them understand what had happened to them. I suppose it reflects a little
bit of a reaction to some of the things that I've seen in our own culture where
the victim suffers a lot because everybody's so interested in catching the guy
who did it a lot of times they're not paying too much attention to the victim
himself. Things are changing a little bit now with victims suing perpetrators
and collecting
and people who are convicted of crimes in some states have to make restitution
to victims. so I thought I would just kind of carry that into a society that was
not was less interested in punishing than in simply stopping the problem,
whatever it was and since their system had no regular system for defense
attorneys it seemed to me that it would naturally fall on the only people that
were involved in the criminal legal system which would be the ones who are also
working for the prosecutor. Actually, ideally, even in our culture, in a sense,
the police should be working for the defendant because if they can remove any
doubt that he's guilty, then when they take the case to court, why, it'll be a
much sounder case. But it often happens that expedience gets in the way and pick
someone who's likely and find all the evidence against them instead of sifting
through all the evidence and then picking the only person who could possibly be
the guilty party.
Since you said that Doppelganger, Rama, and Deadly Silence are all in the same
future history, can you give us an idea of the chronological order, maybe the
distance, the time difference between those three books? and do you plan to
write in this future history? I know you mentioned that you have a sidebar to
Doppelganger Gambit. Do you plan to do a lot more writing in this future
history? I think I will. It offers a lot of opportunities. There are any number
of planets available to set stories on. and
it cover a long span of time Doppelganger is the earliest because it's set right
in the next century and then it's possible that voice out of Rama could come
about at the same time as as Deadly Silence but probably not the ships that set
out to take shuttle boxes to the various colonies and put them in contact with
the rest of the universe again set out about the time the shuttle box was
developed and got perfected so they had ships out running around and by the time
one particular ship got to the planet, got to Mara why it may have been several
hundred years even after Deadly Silence. But Deadly Silence and Voice Out of
Rama are very close to each other, within a century or two of each other. Deadly
Silence is five or six hundred years after A Voice Out of Rama. And, of course,
the one I'm writing at the moment is within a century. of the doppelganger
gambit. It's a little difficult figuring real time and the fact that they had
time dilation going on their ship. So they were actually 10 years away from
Earth when everything happened. So in actual real time, probably the book I'm
writing now and the doppelganger gambit happen almost simultaneously.
Your fourth novel, The Monitor of the Miners and the Shri is completely
different. And as you said, it's in a different future history. Will you do any
writing in that future history? Or what was it? The Sodality? That was the the
governing organization. that's a future history that i was working on as a
teenager and which started out as very peaceful and wonderful and tended to get
much more complex and much more violent the older i got the more i realized that
people just didn't get along with each other all the time i have several short
stories that are said in that particular universe and i'll probably come back to
it again it's an interesting one because it has a lot of different groups none
of which are human and offers possibilities for societies and interplays. And
aliens, the future history I have set up, the one that most of the novels are
in, has a minimal of aliens the far we actually want to run across. One, which
is spacing. And then, of course, there's the aliens that are on the planet on
which the colonists
who are in trouble on the Invictus lands, the book I'm working on at the moment,
has some aliens on it. But there's a minimal of aliens, and if I want to deal
with alien species, it's just really easy to go to that other future history
which has all kinds of aliens running around. I like to think of it as just
being across, being on our same galaxy, it's just on the other side, way out of
contact with us, probably not where we're likely to run into it very soon. I'd
like to ask you a question here, not so much as a science fiction writer, just
from all your experience up to now. What is your idea of aliens, as far as real
life is concerned? We have the idea that there are a lot of them. Other people
have the idea that maybe life is abundant, but intelligence is not. Do you have
any feelings about that one way or the other, predictions now.
I just can't feel that we're the only intelligent species in the galaxy. In the
universe. With infinite possibilities and infinite worlds out there, possibly
less of them habitable by our standards than we might like to think because you
have to have them within a continual life zone instead of these edges where they
keep slipping in and out of a limestone. So maybe the possibilities for really
intelligent life are fewer, but I think they're out there somewhere, and I would
really love to meet one. This book strikes me as coming closest to a so-called
hard science fiction book, and you evidently put in a lot of work on the biology
and the evolutionary facts of the Sri. Is this something that you've been
thinking about since you were a teenager? Or how did that evolve? I think it's
kind of evolved.
Because of my husband's interest in psychology and law, I started out and my
interest was mostly in really hard science fiction. I was a die-hard analog
reader. and the first story ever sold was to analog and it was an analog kind of
story I haven't sold a story to analog since almost everything I've written
since has come out in well the majority of it's come out fantasy and science
fiction I've had one in Galileo and a couple in his magazine before it folded
but I got more and more interested in people and realizing that hardware wasn't
the thing that it was people and that people were interesting and what made them
tick. And so the more I started researching that, the more I got interested in
what makes societies click. And then when I started making up aliens and I
started reading a lot of anthropology to figure out really how societies go
together, the more I read, the more I researched, the more fascinated I got. I
put together a background book before I ever start. the novel itself. It's an
amount of work that I know some people find exhausting.
They couldn't do it and still write. They have any energy left to write the
book. But I enjoy it. I'm very systematic. I start out with a lot of visual
images in my head. And with vague visual images, you have to have them developed
to a very clear, you have to develop a very clear image and you have to find the
words for them and get them translated into actual words out of pictures before
you can get them down on paper so i do a background book and i do maps of the
planet and i do drawings of the flora and fauna and biographies of the people
and the more i read and read on climatology and planetology the more complex
backgrounds get now it takes me It takes me about the same amount of time to put
a background together, but it gets much more complicated. Now the finished
background is almost as thick as the final manuscript on the book. I keep
finding out how complex societies and ecologies are. There's no way, of course,
I can really create one in detail. But I keep working at making them as logical
and as realistic as I can. I keep discovering how much people are influenced by
their cultures in very unconscious ways. And I strive to make an alien that is
genuinely alien, but of course not so much that a human won't be interested in
reading about them. But so that they will react in very alien ways, I work out
the culture down to jokes they think are funny and what the musical instruments
are and what toys their kids play with and maybe even what their plumbing looks
like. So I have the whole society created in such detail in my own mind that the
characters' actions will be influenced by their environment. And a lot of times
I find conflicts in the story then growing out of that society, so they don't
just sound like a plot that's been picked up and translated from mainstream
Earth. There are things that happened then that could only have happened on that
particular planet because of their particular attitudes, because of their
particular environment and culture.
The tape is rolling again. The monitor of the miners in the tree ends with a
trial. I suppose this must be inevitable since you've been around a lawyer so
long. In fact, the lawyer half wrote that particular chapter. He was telling me,
oh, this character ought to say that, then you ought to bring up this point,
then you ought to bring counter with that legal point And the whole chapter
definitely got submitted to him for scrutiny as to procedure and logical
thinking. So he's half the creator of that last chapter.
Your book of short stories, Aventine, just came out. Could you compare writing a
novel with writing short stories beyond the obvious sheer amount of time it
takes to put the words down? Well, I think in a novel, you have so much more
time to create a society and a world and to dwell on character,
characterization. A short story tends to be one little piece, one particular
scene, one particular incident. particularly with Aventine stories. It's a mood
that's created. It's kind of a night gallery kind of mood, I think, probably. In
a night gallery kind of visual image there. And the short story, of course,
would be very concise. But I think dealing with a little punch, you know, boom,
here's one idea. Yes, look it over and here
it is. Whereas the novel, you deal with a lot of complex ideas and a long span
of time.
It isn't so much mood, perhaps, for a novel. It's definitely characterization,
the creation of a whole lot of things around the characters.
Sometimes when I read science fiction books, I get the idea that the writer is a
frustrated scientist who can't, so he or she writes. When I read Aventine, I
couldn't help but notice the centering on the arts in all their various guises.
Are you a frustrated artist? Well, I don't think I'm frustrated. I am an artist.
My artistry happens to be writing. i'm also a fair singer and i do a fair amount
of drawing most of the drawing these days it becomes drawing for the background
books that i put together that whole group centering around the arts was kind of
an accident the first story of the group was the siren garden and then I did a
second one that was Tropic of Eden and when that came out in the magazine the
little blurb that went with it said something about the future of the arts so
every time I turned in a story to him after that I'd simply written a story
around one of the arts he sort of sent up a pattern with his little intro and I
simply kept it up I had no objections to it because I find dancing fascinating.
And I've been involved in theater.
So I enjoy the arts very much and I'm very much a part of them. And I do
consider myself an artist. Somebody said writers aren't born, artists are. And
some artists are dancers, some artists are painters, and some of us are writers.
Did you have to work hard to come up with some of the futuristic art forms such
as the moving sculptures and the infrared detected dance, that sort of thing?
most of that
it's a little hard for me to remember how hard it was because once of course
it's created it seems like it was inevitable that it happened that way
most of those stories came out of of images there'd be like one single image
I like the image of a pair of footprints, scarlet and sand, going away and the
image just kept with me and kept with me, until I found a story to go with it.
I can't remember if I had to work hard to get those futuristic art forms or not,
I really can't. All but one of the stories, the Aventine stories in the
collection, are written from a first person male point of view. Why did you
write them from a male point of view, and is this kind of challenging since your
background is the opposite sex? I'm not sure why I started writing them out from
a male point of view. I can't remember for the genesis of the Siren
Garden story. I can remember some of the elements that went into it. I think
possibly it was because one of my favorite group of short stories has been J.G.
Balares' Vermillion Sands story. They're very much the same kind of mood and the
same kind of a decadent society.
And those were all written from a first-person male viewpoint. And that may have
influenced, because I had this living gem idea that I tried in several forms,
and had always failed with. And then I tried applying the kind of formula for
the stories that were in the J.P.G. Ballard series. and it seemed to work and so
I just kept up with it. I think if I were to write the whole thing over again I
would try to experiment a little more as I did with Benet Noir which I turned
things around then and had the one the woman telling it. I like those particular
stories from a first person point of view because Because you can understand,
then, the storyteller is always victimized in some way in those particular
stories. And you see inside of him, and you don't see things outside. You just
see things entirely from his point of view. And while you may think he's dumb
and getting trapped like that, you can see why he ends up being victimized.
You mentioned a few minutes ago that you were intrigued by the creative process.
When I read Shadow Dance, I recall that Christopher Lloyd, the protagonist, we
kind of see the creative process for his choreographing the dance. Is that
pretty much how you came up with this idea? Did his line of reasoning follow
your line of reasoning?
Good question.
In the sense that having been a dancer, the bits and pieces of past dances he'd
done came back to him and one of them fell into place for him to use then.
someone who is a dancer might get a second level of pleasure out of that
particular story because basically the plot line with the two women and then the
men that they have destroyed and the man that is destroyed by them in the story
follows Jerome Robbins' ballet The Cage, which is a very science fiction-ish
kind of ballet. If you ever have a chance to see it, you ought to because it's
really a very strange ballet. But I came across a scenario that explained that
particular ballet, and then I happened to see it performed, and it seemed a
great plot, generally, to put, to use for a story. So I used it in that
particular story. and I think his creative process kind of follows the way that
a lot of creative process does you have a lot of past experience and a lot of
ideas floating around and then two good ones bump into each other and things
click and then they start to add up
Okay, what the engineer tells me we need Amen.